content/blogs/anatomy-of-a-logo-design/anatomy-of-a-logo-design.md, before:

---
title: Anatomy of a Logo Design
author: R (Chandra) Chandrasekhar
date: 2020-01-11
modified: 2020-11-11
category: Design
tags: XeLaTeX, logos, graphics
---

## The request

My friend Solus "Sol" Simkin has a well-earned reputation as a [Renaissance man](https://www.thefreedictionary.com/renaissance+man). Among other things, he is a virtuoso of design. He endows his creations with an ethereal air of perfection---where mathematics meets aesthetics---to transmogrify the mundane or banal into unforgettable works of art.

Some weeks ago, he was approached by---of all establishments---a firm of consulting philosophers, who wanted to brand their practice with a logo. They wanted something impressive, memorable, and easily recognized as pertaining to philosophy. They left the details to him, emphatically observing that they did not want their personal biases to colour their logo (pun intended).

## The quest

This unusual request sent the cogwheels in Sol's brain whirring furiously as he imagined the logo from different design standpoints. He swept through, in fast motion in his mind, a myriad of options, only some of which I have chronicled here.

### Statues of Socrates and Diotima

He first thought of the statues of [Socrates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Socrates) and [Diotima](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diotima_of_Mantinea) whose words had earned his undying admiration when he had visited Athens just before the 2004 summer Olympics were held there. What noble thoughts from what ancient minds!

\begin{figure*}[h]
  \begin{minipage}[b]{0.5\linewidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[height=40mm]{images/socrates-close-up.jpg}
    \subcaption*{Socrates}
  \end{minipage}
  \begin{minipage}[b]{0.5\linewidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[height=40mm]{images/diotima-2.jpg}
    \subcaption*{Diotima}
  \end{minipage}
\end{figure*}

```{=html}
<div class="side-by-side">
<figure>
<img src="{attach}images/socrates-close-up.jpg" alt="Socrates" title="Socrates" style="flex: 50%">
<figcaption>Socrates</figcaption>
</figure>
<figure>
<img src="{attach}images/diotima-2.jpg" alt="Diotima" title="Diotima" style="flex: 50%">
<figcaption>Diotima</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>
```

But would a layperson recognize those statues and make the link? He thought not, in these days of frenetic and fading fashions and fads, which came and went faster than the famed fruitfly, [Drosophila melanogaster](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drosophila_melanogaster#Lifecycle_and_reproduction). Why, most people would not even recognize their national flags these days, let alone intellectual icons from the past.

### A syllogism in symbols?

Mathematics and philosophy are the two excursions of the human mind that naturally run closest to each other. Why not then a [syllogism](https://www.lexico.com/en/definition/syllogism) expressed in the austere symbols of mathematics?
$$
\begin{aligned}
a &\implies b\\
b &\implies c\\
\therefore\hspace{0.5em}a &\implies c
\end{aligned}
$$
He then pondered the legions of people who had made the compulsory bittersweet acquaintance with mathematics, forced upon them in elementary school, and forever forsworn thereafter. No, an expression of mathematical logic was not a good idea either: it would either evoke painful memories, or be passed over in utter incomprehension.

### Celtic symbols

Mathematics and philosophy share another quality. In one of its branches, mathematics is devoted to the study of [knots](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knot_theory) while [philosophy](https://www.britannica.com/topic/philosophy) generally grapples with the knotty problems of life. He thought about the [trefoil knot](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/TrefoilKnot.html), stylized as the Celtic [triquetra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triquetra) and its relatives, with their logic-defying symmetry. Here was something symmetrical, beautiful, engaging, intriguing, mathematical, and philosophical, all at the same time. Surely, that would nail the design.

\begin{figure*}[h]
  \begin{minipage}[b]{0.5\linewidth}
    \centering
    \includesvg[height=40mm]{images/trefoil.svg}
    \subcaption*{Trefoil}
  \end{minipage}
  \begin{minipage}[b]{0.5\linewidth}
    \centering
    \includesvg[height=40mm]{images/braid.svg}
    \subcaption*{Braid}
  \end{minipage}
\end{figure*}

```{=html}
<div class="side-by-side">
<figure>
<img src="{attach}images/trefoil.svg" alt="Trefoil" title="Trefoil" style="flex: 50%">
<figcaption>Trefoil</figcaption>
</figure>
<figure>
<img src="{attach}images/braid.svg" alt="Braid" title="Braid" style="flex: 50%">
<figcaption>Braid</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>
```

But after he slept on the idea, it struck him as too vague: how would one know which [aspect of the braid](http://symboldictionary.net/?p=159) was being alluded to? What if someone thought of it as, say, the logo of a Society of [Druids](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Druid)? Too many ifs and buts obfuscated what had initially seemed an inspired  choice.

### Popper and falsifiability

Sol then turned his attention to science. [Karl Popper](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl_Popper), who was one of the twentieth century's celebrated philosophers of science, came to mind. He had promulgated a principle that has its roots in mathematics.

It is not possible to _prove_ Pythagoras's Theorem simply by showing that it has held water in a million cases. But a _single counterexample_ disproving it would be sufficient to knock it off its perch on the pedestal of mathematical truth. Thankfully, that is not the case. The famed theorem has been proved by methods that are mathematically rigorous, and it will therefore stand the test of time. Period. No questions.

Unlike mathematics though, science is built up on the interplay between theory and experiments. There is no neat, logical way in which the "truth" of a theory may be proved. And again, a zillion experiments upholding the predictions of a theory do not necessarily prove its correctness. But the results of a _single_ experiment that contradicts the theory is enough to undermine it wholesale.

This asymmetry on the onus of proof in science is at the heart of the [Criterion of Falsifiability](https://www.britannica.com/topic/criterion-of-falsifiability) put forward by Popper.

Popper held that a scientific theory could never be pronounced correct even if it explained Nature countless times; but a single instance of its failure would suffice to prove its inadequacy. Popper's premise was that any theory that claimed the least pretence to be scientific must provide an experimentally [falsifiable prediction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Falsifiability) that could be settled conclusively by an experiment. 

But this foundational principle of science has now been called into question by [String Theory](https://www.britannica.com/science/string-theory), which is a relative newcomer to theoretical physics, but one that has captured the common imagination, judging by the popular explanations that abound on the Web [@mann2019; @wood2019; @jones2020]. And whether string theory is or is not science, Popper notwithstanding, is an issue that is still up for debate [@siegel2015; @castelvecchi2016; @alves2017; @francis2019].

But, coming back to the task at hand, how would such an abstract idea as falsifiability find expression in a logo? Perhaps the correct medium for it would be a [comic strip](https://www.explainxkcd.com/wiki/index.php/2078:_Popper), but alas, comics do not a logo make.

### Kuhn and paradigm shifts

Sol racked his brain for more ideas when he suddenly stumbled upon the half-remembered phrase [paradigm shift](https://www.lexico.com/definition/paradigm_shift) coined by Thomas Kuhn and popularized in his enduring tome, [_The Structure of Scientific Revolutions_](https://www.amazon.com/Structure-Scientific-Revolutions-50th-Anniversary/dp/0226458121/). Science did not evolve peacefully, but every so often experienced seismic corrections or radical changes of perspective that led to new theories that predicted the world much better than before. But how in heaven was he to squeeze all that into a logo? And wouldn't that narrow it to the philosophy of science rather than to all of philosophy? He had encountered another [cul-de-sac](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/cul-de-sac) in his reconnaisance for a viable design.

### The incubation

It was now two weeks since he had been commissioned to work on the logo, and Sol did not have even one draft design that passed muster. He feared that he was losing his golden touch that landed a winner with each design. Exhausted, dispirited, and a little apprehensive, he fell into a deep but refreshing sleep.

When he awoke, he had a clear recollection of a dream---or was it a reverie---in which he had seen the piercing eyes of a sharp-nosed man, whose shock of dark hair fell to his shoulders, and whose mouth was framed by a sparse moustache and a [Van Dyke beard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Van_Dyke_beard). It was a face vaguely familiar, yet tantalizingly out of recollection's reach.

Rather than fret and fume, and wildly surf the Web, he decided to let the matter rest, but not for so long that the image faded from his mind's eye. No, he was in an earnest quest, but at his own pace and without panic.

While he was working on some unrelated task, the thought suddenly flashed in his mind that he should harness the Web to see if there was any gallery of portraits of well-known philosophers against which he could attempt a match with the face he had dreamed of.

A cursory search of the Web gave no comfort whether in images or words. He then thought about the hair style of the man in his dream and definitely ruled out the Wittgensteins and Kierkegaards. He decided to search among the likes of Liebnitz and Newton, both of whom were celebrated philosophers of their time. No luck there either.

He thought of the calculus, whose invention was a bone of contention between Liebnitz and Newton, and wondered if it was the greatest philosophical invention (or discovery?). And then it hit him: calculus could not have been invented without coordinate geometry: that marriage of geometry and algebra. And that father of that wunderkind was Rene Descartes. With bated breath Sol searched the Web for images of Rene Descartes. And bingo! he had a [gallery full of faces](https://www.google.com/search?tbm=isch&q=Rene+Descartes) that were remarkably similar to the image of his dream.

Relieved that he was at last on the scent to the target of his quest, he relaxed for a day or two, which he spent reading about the life of Descartes. He chuckled when he read that Descartes had the unusual habit of not normally rising before noon. He learned that he met with a tragic death in Sweden from pneumonia caused by the the harsh Scandinavian winter and the duress of having to rise early in the morning to keep his appointment with his royal patron, the Queen of XXX.

Sol foraged for anything that could throw light---like Newton's falling apple---on how Descartes got his primary insight of superimposing an orthogonal grid on the plane, to tame geometry with algebra. He went thus far but no further, and decided to pursue that query when he had time to lavish on it. For now, he need ideas for a logo, and time was racing fast and past.

Sol pondered the tragic death of Descartes, and whether it held the clue to the deep philosophical truth that he was after, but to no avail. Finally, he decided to act the part of Descartes. And then the elephant in the room popped into view. Why was he, a Frenchman, in Sweden? Because he had gone to teach _philosophy_ to Queen XXX; not mathematics but philosophy.

And what was Descartes' most profound philosophical utterance? Oh! Of course! [Cogito Ergo Sum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cogito,_ergo_sum): "I think, therefore I am". And there he had it: the nucleus of the logo he had been asked to design.

OLD STUFF

Let us suppose that you have been hired by a firm of consulting philosophers to design a logo for their establishment. They want something impressive, memorable, and easily recognized as pertaining to philosophy. They have left it to you to decide whether it would be an image of some sort, or an icon, or a shield, or plain text.

You mull over the possibilities and weigh them against your own skill-set. You decide against, for example a statue of Socrates, <!--See if a picture can be provided for this.--> because not everyone will recognize the person depicted and what he stood for.

You next consider something from mathematical logic along the lines of $p \implies q \iff \not q \implies \not p$. But you give up on that because it is too specialized and only partially representative of philosophy.

Then you remember Thomas Kuhn and his hypothesis of falsifiability as the basis of science. Some scientists, you recall, rejected _string theory_ simply because it made no predictions that could be subject to the test of falsifiability. But how in heaven would you squeeze that into a logo? And wouldn't that narrow it to the philosophy of science rather than to all of philosophy.

Weary and teary after much squinting at screens and books, you fall into a refreshing sleep or reverie---you know not which. In your mind's eye you met a man who mouthed something that sounded foreign, but you were hard pressed to identify what pearls of wisdom he had mouthed. But his face was etched in your mind to persist long after the dream. And what a face. A head with a shock of dark hair that fell to his shoulders, a pair of piercing, knowing eyes, and a sparse moustache and goatee.

Somewhat inspired but also benumbed, you scantily searched

## Epilogue

The _SwanLotus_ banner you see on top of this page was generated using [open source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_software) tools that transformed text to PDF and thence to SVG. No specialized graphical applications or proprietary programs were involved in its making. If you are intrigued enough by this information and wish to try your hand at doing something similar, read on.

### Typesetting text professionally

Word processors have been around since the late seventies, but professional electronic typesetting took its birth in XXXX when a professor at Stanford University named Donald E Knuth developed and released top the world free-of-charge a program called TeX (pronounced XXX) that we intended to "typeset beautiful mathematics".

That program was not an easy one to master and it has spawned augmenteations called _formats_, the most well-known of which is the [LaTeX](https://www.latex-project.org/) document preparation system. LaTeX has traditionally been hemmed in by the types of fonts it could use, among other limitations. Its more recent relative---another format called XeLaTeX---overcomes this limitation. One result is the possibility of typesetting languages having a non-Latin script. Another advantage is that XeLaTeX allows for typesetting RL languages. Yet another benefit of XeLaTeX is the possibility of using its output to design logos, which is what we will discuss here.

### Why not a graphics program?

Why would one take the route of professional typesetting when there are so many free and not-so-free graphical programs that may be used to typeset a logo in a matter of minutes/ Why bother taking a tortuous route that involves writing in a markup language and debugging it until the desired result is achieved?

I will list my reasons for taking this route. Working with a graphics program usually involves placing and editing graphical objects interactively using a mouse. The final desired result may be frozen, but it cannot be changed easily. Depending on how significant the change is, considerable effort might be demanded. This is something I look upon askance because I am not naturally deft "mousing my way" to artistic perfection, like some people are.

Change of colour, moving one object a smidgen, improving the kerning or any number of other changes---major or minor---may be programmatically made and repeatably too because what is involved is change of the "markup source code".

When edits are made by hand and the result tweaked by eye,what is obtained is optimal but not repeatable. If one were to change something, the result might not be as aesthetically pleasing. More about this later.

### The Illustrations

The statues of Socrates and Diotima shown in this blog are exhibited outside the [Undercroft](https://www.uwa.edu.au/theatres/venues/undercroft) of [The University of Western Australia](https://www.uwa.edu.au/).

<!--LaTeX

boxes in LaTeX

boxsep
boxrule

Vpadding
Hpadding

Total:

Some arithmetic [Hugo Configuration](https://gohugo.io/getting-started/configuration/)

Examples

Generating PDFs, SVGs, images, banners, favicons-->

Commit message:

Augmented blog with Rene Descartes.

content/blogs/anatomy-of-a-logo-design/anatomy-of-a-logo-design.md, after:

---
title: Anatomy of a Logo Design
author: R (Chandra) Chandrasekhar
date: 2020-01-11
modified: 2020-11-12
category: Design
tags: XeLaTeX, logos, graphics
---

## The request

My friend Solus "Sol" Simkin has a well-earned reputation as a [Renaissance man](https://www.thefreedictionary.com/renaissance+man). Among other things, he is a virtuoso of design. He endows his creations with an ethereal air of perfection---where mathematics meets aesthetics---to transmogrify the mundane or banal into unforgettable works of art.

Some weeks ago, he was approached by---of all establishments---a firm of consulting philosophers, who wanted to brand their practice with a logo. They wanted something impressive, memorable, and easily recognized as pertaining to philosophy. They left the details to him, emphatically observing that they did not want their personal biases to colour their logo (pun intended).

## The quest

This unusual request sent the cogwheels in Sol's brain whirring furiously as he imagined the logo from different design standpoints. He swept through, in fast motion in his mind, a myriad of options, only some of which I have chronicled here.

### Statues of Socrates and Diotima

He first thought of the statues of [Socrates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Socrates) and [Diotima](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diotima_of_Mantinea) whose words had earned his undying admiration when he had visited Athens just before the 2004 summer Olympics were held there. What noble thoughts from what ancient minds!

\begin{figure*}[h]
  \begin{minipage}[b]{0.5\linewidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[height=40mm]{images/socrates-close-up.jpg}
    \subcaption*{Socrates}
  \end{minipage}
  \begin{minipage}[b]{0.5\linewidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[height=40mm]{images/diotima-2.jpg}
    \subcaption*{Diotima}
  \end{minipage}
\end{figure*}

```{=html}
<div class="side-by-side">
<figure>
<img src="{attach}images/socrates-close-up.jpg" alt="Socrates" title="Socrates" style="flex: 50%">
<figcaption>Socrates</figcaption>
</figure>
<figure>
<img src="{attach}images/diotima-2.jpg" alt="Diotima" title="Diotima" style="flex: 50%">
<figcaption>Diotima</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>
```

But would a layperson recognize those statues and make the link? He thought not, in these days of frenetic and fading fashions and fads, which came and went faster than the famed fruitfly, [Drosophila melanogaster](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drosophila_melanogaster#Lifecycle_and_reproduction). Why, most people would not even recognize their national flags these days, let alone intellectual icons from the past.

### A syllogism in symbols?

Mathematics and philosophy are the two excursions of the human mind that naturally run closest to each other. Why not then a [syllogism](https://www.lexico.com/en/definition/syllogism) expressed in the austere symbols of mathematics?
$$
\begin{aligned}
a &\implies b\\
b &\implies c\\
\therefore\hspace{0.5em}a &\implies c
\end{aligned}
$$
He then pondered the legions of people who had made the compulsory bittersweet acquaintance with mathematics, forced upon them in elementary school, and forever forsworn thereafter. No, an expression of mathematical logic was not a good idea either: it would either evoke painful memories, or be passed over in utter incomprehension.

### Celtic symbols

Mathematics and philosophy share another quality. In one of its branches, mathematics is devoted to the study of [knots](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knot_theory) while [philosophy](https://www.britannica.com/topic/philosophy) generally grapples with the knotty problems of life. He thought about the [trefoil knot](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/TrefoilKnot.html), stylized as the Celtic [triquetra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triquetra) and its relatives, with their logic-defying symmetry. Here was something symmetrical, beautiful, engaging, intriguing, mathematical, and philosophical, all at the same time. Surely, that would nail the design.

\begin{figure*}[h]
  \begin{minipage}[b]{0.5\linewidth}
    \centering
    \includesvg[height=40mm]{images/trefoil.svg}
    \subcaption*{Trefoil}
  \end{minipage}
  \begin{minipage}[b]{0.5\linewidth}
    \centering
    \includesvg[height=40mm]{images/braid.svg}
    \subcaption*{Braid}
  \end{minipage}
\end{figure*}

```{=html}
<div class="side-by-side">
<figure>
<img src="{attach}images/trefoil.svg" alt="Trefoil" title="Trefoil" style="flex: 50%">
<figcaption>Trefoil</figcaption>
</figure>
<figure>
<img src="{attach}images/braid.svg" alt="Braid" title="Braid" style="flex: 50%">
<figcaption>Braid</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>
```

But after he slept on the idea, it struck him as too vague: how would one know which [aspect of the braid](http://symboldictionary.net/?p=159) was being alluded to? What if someone thought of it as, say, the logo of a Society of [Druids](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Druid)? Too many ifs and buts obfuscated what had initially seemed an inspired  choice.

### Popper and falsifiability

Sol then turned his attention to science. [Karl Popper](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl_Popper), who was one of the twentieth century's celebrated philosophers of science, came to mind. He had promulgated a principle that has its roots in mathematics.

It is not possible to _prove_ Pythagoras's Theorem simply by showing that it has held water in a million cases. But a _single counterexample_ disproving it would be sufficient to knock it off its perch on the pedestal of mathematical truth. Thankfully, that is not the case. The famed theorem has been proved by methods that are mathematically rigorous, and it will therefore stand the test of time. Period. No questions.

Unlike mathematics though, science is built up on the interplay between theory and experiments. There is no neat, logical way in which the "truth" of a theory may be proved. And again, a zillion experiments upholding the predictions of a theory do not necessarily prove its correctness. But the results of a _single_ experiment that contradicts the theory is enough to undermine it wholesale.

This asymmetry on the onus of proof in science is at the heart of the [Criterion of Falsifiability](https://www.britannica.com/topic/criterion-of-falsifiability) put forward by Popper.

Popper held that a scientific theory could never be pronounced correct even if it explained Nature countless times; but a single instance of its failure would suffice to prove its inadequacy. Popper's premise was that any theory that claimed the least pretence to be scientific must provide an experimentally [falsifiable prediction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Falsifiability) that could be settled conclusively by an experiment. 

But this foundational principle of science has now been called into question by [String Theory](https://www.britannica.com/science/string-theory), which is a relative newcomer to theoretical physics, but one that has captured the common imagination, judging by the popular explanations that abound on the Web [@mann2019; @wood2019; @jones2020]. And whether string theory is or is not science, Popper notwithstanding, is an issue that is still up for debate [@siegel2015; @castelvecchi2016; @alves2017; @francis2019].

But, coming back to the task at hand, how would such an abstract idea as falsifiability find expression in a logo? Perhaps the correct medium for it would be a [comic strip](https://www.explainxkcd.com/wiki/index.php/2078:_Popper), but alas, comics do not a logo make.

### Kuhn and paradigm shifts

Sol racked his brain for more ideas when he suddenly stumbled upon the half-remembered phrase [paradigm shift](https://www.lexico.com/definition/paradigm_shift) coined by Thomas Kuhn and popularized in his enduring tome, [_The Structure of Scientific Revolutions_](https://www.amazon.com/Structure-Scientific-Revolutions-50th-Anniversary/dp/0226458121/) [@kuhn2012]. Kuhn held that Science did not evolve peacefully, but every so often experienced seismic corrections or radical changes of perspective that led to new theories that predicted the world much better than before. But how in heaven was he to squeeze all that into a logo? And wouldn't that narrow it to the philosophy of science rather than to all of philosophy? Solrued that he had entered another [cul-de-sac](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/cul-de-sac) in his reconnaissance for a viable design.

### The incubation

It was now two weeks since he had been commissioned to work on the logo, and Sol did not have even one draft design that passed muster. He feared that he was losing his golden touch that landed a winner with each design. Exhausted, dispirited, and a little apprehensive, he fell into a deep but refreshing sleep.

When he awoke, he had a clear recollection of a dream---or was it a reverie---in which he had seen the piercing but dreamy eyes of a sharp-nosed man, whose shock of dark hair fell to his shoulders, and whose mouth was framed by a sparse moustache and a [Van Dyke beard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Van_Dyke_beard). It was a face vaguely familiar, yet tantalizingly out of recollection's reach.

Rather than fret and fume, and wildly surf the Web, he decided to let the matter rest, but not for so long that the image faded from his mind's eye. No, he was in an earnest quest, but at his own pace, relaxed and without panic.

### The search for a face

While he was working on some unrelated task, the thought suddenly flashed in his mind that he should harness the Web to see if there was any gallery of portraits of well-known philosophers against whom he could attempt a match with the face he had dreamed of.

A cursory search of the Web gave no comfort whether in images or words. He then thought about the hair-style of the man in his dream and definitely ruled out the [Wittgensteins](https://tinyurl.com/y2sn8uzb) and [Kierkegaards](https://tinyurl.com/y3xdx3gl).

He decided to search among the likes of [Liebnitz](https://tinyurl.com/yxomtbt5) and [Newton](https://tinyurl.com/y5lc2fyx), both of whom were not only celebrated philosophers of their time, but also sported long locks, whether natural or wigged. But no luck there either. Their eyes appeared different from those in his dream.

He got side-tracked and began contemplating the calculus, whose invention (or discovery?) was a bone of great contention between Liebnitz and Newton [@bardi2007], and wondered if indeed it was the greatest idea of all time.

And then it hit him like a ton of bricks. _Calculus could not have been invented without coordinate geometry---the offspring of that fortuitous marriage of geometry and algebra_. And the father of _that_ wunderkind was [René Descartes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ren%C3%A9_Descartes). With bated breath, Sol searched the Web for images of René Descartes. And bingo! he had a [gallery full of faces](https://tinyurl.com/y57nykjd) that were remarkably similar to the image of his reverie, with eyes that were piercing and dreamy at the same time.

### René Descartes

Relieved that he was at last on scent to the target of his quest, Sol relaxed for a day or two, which he spent reading about the [life of Descartes](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Rene-Descartes) [@watson2020]. He chuckled when he read that "the 22-year-old [Queen] Christina [of Sweden] perversely made the 53-year-old Descartes rise before 5:00 am to give her philosophy lessons, even though she knew of his habit of lying in bed until 11 o’clock in the morning." [@watson2020]. He discovered that Descartes tragically died in Sweden from pneumonia, presumably caused by the Scandinavian winter and the duress of having to rise early in the morning to keep his appointment with his royal patron.

Sol foraged for anything that could throw light---like Newton's falling apple---on how Descartes got his primary insight of superimposing an orthogonal grid on the plane, to tame geometry with algebra. He went thus far but no further, and decided to pursue that query when he had time to lavish on it. For now, he need ideas for a logo, and time was racing fast and past.

Sol pondered the tragic death of Descartes, and whether it held the clue to the deep philosophical truth that he was after, but to no avail. Finally, he decided to act the part of Descartes. And then the elephant in the room popped into view. Why was he, a Frenchman, in Sweden? Because he had gone to teach _philosophy_ to Queen XXX; not mathematics but philosophy.

And what was Descartes' most profound philosophical utterance? Oh! Of course! [Cogito Ergo Sum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cogito,_ergo_sum): "I think, therefore I am". And there he had it: the nucleus of the logo he had been asked to design.

OLD STUFF

Let us suppose that you have been hired by a firm of consulting philosophers to design a logo for their establishment. They want something impressive, memorable, and easily recognized as pertaining to philosophy. They have left it to you to decide whether it would be an image of some sort, or an icon, or a shield, or plain text.

You mull over the possibilities and weigh them against your own skill-set. You decide against, for example a statue of Socrates, <!--See if a picture can be provided for this.--> because not everyone will recognize the person depicted and what he stood for.

You next consider something from mathematical logic along the lines of $p \implies q \iff \not q \implies \not p$. But you give up on that because it is too specialized and only partially representative of philosophy.

Then you remember Thomas Kuhn and his hypothesis of falsifiability as the basis of science. Some scientists, you recall, rejected _string theory_ simply because it made no predictions that could be subject to the test of falsifiability. But how in heaven would you squeeze that into a logo? And wouldn't that narrow it to the philosophy of science rather than to all of philosophy.

Weary and teary after much squinting at screens and books, you fall into a refreshing sleep or reverie---you know not which. In your mind's eye you met a man who mouthed something that sounded foreign, but you were hard pressed to identify what pearls of wisdom he had mouthed. But his face was etched in your mind to persist long after the dream. And what a face. A head with a shock of dark hair that fell to his shoulders, a pair of piercing, knowing eyes, and a sparse moustache and goatee.

Somewhat inspired but also benumbed, you scantily searched

## Epilogue

The _SwanLotus_ banner you see on top of this page was generated using [open source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_software) tools that transformed text to PDF and thence to SVG. No specialized graphical applications or proprietary programs were involved in its making. If you are intrigued enough by this information and wish to try your hand at doing something similar, read on.

### Typesetting text professionally

Word processors have been around since the late seventies, but professional electronic typesetting took its birth in XXXX when a professor at Stanford University named Donald E Knuth developed and released top the world free-of-charge a program called TeX (pronounced XXX) that we intended to "typeset beautiful mathematics".

That program was not an easy one to master and it has spawned augmenteations called _formats_, the most well-known of which is the [LaTeX](https://www.latex-project.org/) document preparation system. LaTeX has traditionally been hemmed in by the types of fonts it could use, among other limitations. Its more recent relative---another format called XeLaTeX---overcomes this limitation. One result is the possibility of typesetting languages having a non-Latin script. Another advantage is that XeLaTeX allows for typesetting RL languages. Yet another benefit of XeLaTeX is the possibility of using its output to design logos, which is what we will discuss here.

### Why not a graphics program?

Why would one take the route of professional typesetting when there are so many free and not-so-free graphical programs that may be used to typeset a logo in a matter of minutes/ Why bother taking a tortuous route that involves writing in a markup language and debugging it until the desired result is achieved?

I will list my reasons for taking this route. Working with a graphics program usually involves placing and editing graphical objects interactively using a mouse. The final desired result may be frozen, but it cannot be changed easily. Depending on how significant the change is, considerable effort might be demanded. This is something I look upon askance because I am not naturally deft "mousing my way" to artistic perfection, like some people are.

Change of colour, moving one object a smidgen, improving the kerning or any number of other changes---major or minor---may be programmatically made and repeatably too because what is involved is change of the "markup source code".

When edits are made by hand and the result tweaked by eye,what is obtained is optimal but not repeatable. If one were to change something, the result might not be as aesthetically pleasing. More about this later.

### The Illustrations

The statues of Socrates and Diotima shown in this blog are exhibited outside the [Undercroft](https://www.uwa.edu.au/theatres/venues/undercroft) of [The University of Western Australia](https://www.uwa.edu.au/).

<!--LaTeX

boxes in LaTeX

boxsep
boxrule

Vpadding
Hpadding

Total:

Some arithmetic [Hugo Configuration](https://gohugo.io/getting-started/configuration/)

Examples

Generating PDFs, SVGs, images, banners, favicons-->
