content/pages/about.md, before:

---
title: "About"
content_title: "About SwanLotus"
author: "R (Chandra) Chandrasekhar"
date: "2021-04-06"
save_as: "about.html"
---

The swan and the lotus are ancient symbols in the tradition of [Sanātana Dharma](https://www.britannica.com/topic/sanatana-dharma). The swan is a symbol of discrimination, and is the vehicle for [Sarasvatī](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saraswati), the Goddess of Learning. The lotus blossom, even though rooted in mud, is unsullied by it, and represents purity and beauty. Sarasvatī is depicted as seated on a white lotus. So, this website, concerned as it is with learning, knowledge, and wisdom, is named SwanLotus.

## The logo

The website logo for SwanLotus is shown below:

![Logo of SwanLotus: a black S and a white L.]({static}../images/swanlotus-open-graph-image.jpg){width=30%}

The symbol "S" for the swan is in black, because for some periods in my life, I lived in [Perth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perth), Australia, where the [Swan River](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swan_River_(Western_Australia)) flows, and where black swans abound.

![[Black Swan](http://absfreepic.com/free-photos/download/the-black-swan-on-lake-2701x1800_84370.html): [CC0 Public Domain](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).]({static}images/black-swan.jpg){width=50%}

The symbol "L" for the lotus is in white, signifying the white lotus:

![[White Lotus](https://www.publicdomainpictures.net/pictures/270000/velka/white-lotus-flower-close-up.jpg): [CC0 Public Domain](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).]({static}images/white-lotus-flower-close-up.jpg){width=50%}

## The author

My name is R (Chandra) Chandrasekhar. I am a retired biomedical engineer and university academic. I am also a lifelong learner. My purpose in setting up this website is twofold:

#.  It is the home on the Web for my book-in-preparation entitled [_Secrets of Academic Success_](sas.html). In it I have tried to impart some of the knowledge about studying and learning that my teachers and others have inculcated in me. The book is in electronic form and may be [freely downloaded]({static}../sas-manuscript/SAS-partial.pdf).

#.  I blog on this site, writing about whatever takes my fancy. Many of my blogs are long reads, which I have christened _slogs_. If you display the intellectual and intestinal fortitude to read them to the end, I salute and thank you. \emojifont:wink:\normalfont

    Many of the blogs are from the early days of the Web and have found a durable home here. I have taken the opportunity to update them where necessary. They are arranged by the original date, rather than when last modified.

For the curious among you, who wonder what I look like, I have appended two photographs below, taken some decades ago.

![Professor Yianni Attikiouzel, my PhD supervisor, and me, displaying the PhD gold medal awarded to me by the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, [The University of Western Australia](https://www.uwa.edu.au/home), in September 1997.^[Image is copyright by the University of Western Australia with citation: UWA Archives 29071P. First published in the "The Leader"  dated 22 September 1997, Vol. 16, No. 15, pp 1--2.]]({static}images/yianni-attikiouzel-gold-medal.jpg){width=80%}

![[Dr A P J Abdul Kalam](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A._P._J._Abdul_Kalam), President of India from 25 July 2002 to 25 July 2007, autographing my copy of his autobiography, [_Wings of Fire_](https://www.amazon.in/Wings-Fire-Autobiography-Abdul-Kalam/dp/8173711461/), at the BioVision 2001 conference in Bangalore, India, in December 2001.]({static}images/abdul-kalam-autograph.jpg){width=80%}

Commit message:

Changed licence of book to be copyright plus all rights reserved. Also file linkages to PDF.

content/pages/about.md, after:

---
title: "About"
content_title: "About SwanLotus"
author: "R (Chandra) Chandrasekhar"
date: "2021-04-06"
save_as: "about.html"
---

The swan and the lotus are ancient symbols in the tradition of [Sanātana Dharma](https://www.britannica.com/topic/sanatana-dharma). The swan is purported to be able to extract milk from a mixture of milk and water, and thus signifies discrimination.

The lotus blossom, even though rooted in mud, is unsullied by it, and represents purity and beauty.

[Sarasvatī](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saraswati), the Goddess of Learning, is depicted as seated on a white lotus, and having a swan for her vehicle. So, this website, concerned as it is with learning, knowledge, and hopefully wisdom, is named SwanLotus in [CamelCase](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camel_case).

## The logo

The website logo for SwanLotus is shown below:

![Logo of SwanLotus: a black S and a white L on a blue background.]({static}../images/swanlotus-open-graph-image.jpg){width=30%}

The symbol "S" for the swan is in black, because for some periods in my life, I lived in [Perth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perth), Australia, where the blue [Swan River](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swan_River_(Western_Australia)) flows, and where black swans abound.

![[Black Swan](http://absfreepic.com/free-photos/download/the-black-swan-on-lake-2701x1800_84370.html): [CC0 Public Domain](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).]({static}images/black-swan.jpg){width=50%}

The symbol "L" for the lotus is in white, signifying the white lotus:

![[White Lotus](https://www.publicdomainpictures.net/pictures/270000/velka/white-lotus-flower-close-up.jpg): [CC0 Public Domain](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).]({static}images/white-lotus-flower-close-up.jpg){width=50%}

## The author

My name is R (Chandra) Chandrasekhar. I am a retired biomedical engineer and university academic. I am also a lifelong learner. My purpose in setting up this website is twofold:

#.  It is the Web-home for my book-in-preparation entitled [_Secrets of Academic Success_](sas.html). In it, I have tried to impart some of the knowledge about studying and learning that my various teachers have inculcated in me. The book is in electronic form, and is protected by [copyright](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyright), with [all rights reserved](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/All_rights_reserved). It may be [downloaded from here](sas-manuscript/SAS-partial.pdf) at no charge.

#.  I also blog on this site, writing about whatever takes my fancy. Many of my blogs are long reads, which I have christened _slogs_. If you display the intellectual and intestinal fortitude to read them to the end, I salute and thank you. \emojifont:wink:\normalfont

    Many of the blogs are from the early days of the Web and have found a durable home here. I have taken the opportunity to update them where necessary. They are arranged by the original date, rather than when last modified.

For the curious among you, who wonder what I look like, I have appended two photographs below, taken with eminent personages, some decades ago.

![Professor Yianni Attikiouzel, my PhD supervisor, with me holding the PhD gold medal awarded by the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, [The University of Western Australia](https://www.uwa.edu.au/home), in September 1997.^[This image is copyright by the University of Western Australia with citation: UWA Archives 29071P. First published in the "The Leader"  dated 22 September 1997, Vol. 16, No. 15, pp 1--2. Used with permision.]]({static}images/yianni-attikiouzel-gold-medal.jpg){width=80%}

![[Dr A P J Abdul Kalam](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A._P._J._Abdul_Kalam), President of India from 25 July 2002 to 25 July 2007, autographing my copy of his autobiography, [_Wings of Fire_](https://www.amazon.in/Wings-Fire-Autobiography-Abdul-Kalam/dp/8173711461/), at the BioVision 2001 conference in Bangalore, India, in December 2001, at which he delivered the keynote address.]({static}images/abdul-kalam-autograph.jpg){width=80%}
