content/pages/home.md, before:

---
title: "Home"
content_title: "Welcome to SwanLotus"
author: "R (Chandra) Chandrasekhar"
date: "2020-02-17"
URL:
save_as: "index.html"
---

[SwanLotus]({static}../index.html) exists to help you learn better. Regardless of where you live, what you study, and how old you are, may you be empowered to learn better, remember longer, and keep learning all your life. Enjoy learning! Keep on learning! :slightly_smiling_face:

## Secrets of Academic Success

[_Secrets of Academic Success_]({static}../sas.html) is a book written to help students study effectively and learn better. [The hitherto completed chapters of the draft manuscript  may be downloaded here in PDF format]({static}../sas-manuscript/SAS-partial.pdf).

## Blogs

I also [blog]({static}../blogs) here on eclectic subjects. Some blogs are short and light. Others are long and heavy, and are better described as _slogs_. :wink:

## Feedback

I value and look forward to your ideas for improving _Secrets of Academic Success_ and  this website. Please [email your feedback to me](mailto:feedback.sasbook@gmail.com).

Happy lifelong learning! :smile:

Commit message:

SAS page was filled out and Home Page slightly modified.

content/pages/home.md, after:

---
title: "Home"
content_title: "Welcome to SwanLotus"
author: "R (Chandra) Chandrasekhar"
date: "2020-02-17"
URL:
save_as: "index.html"
---

[SwanLotus]({static}../index.html) exists to help you learn better. Regardless of where you live, what you study, and how old you are, may you be empowered to learn better, remember longer, and keep learning all your life. Enjoy learning! Keep on learning! :slightly_smiling_face:

## Secrets of Academic Success

SwanLotus is the home of [_Secrets of Academic Success_]({static}../sas.html) on the Web. It is a book written to help students study effectively and learn better. [The completed chapters of the draft manuscript  may be downloaded here in PDF format]({static}../sas-manuscript/SAS-partial.pdf).

## Blogs

I also [blog]({static}../blogs) here on eclectic subjects. Some blogs are short and light. Others are long and heavy, and are better described as _slogs_. :wink:

## Feedback

I value and look forward to your ideas for improving _Secrets of Academic Success_ and  this website. Please [email your feedback to me](mailto:feedback.sasbook@gmail.com).

Happy lifelong learning! :smile:
