content/pages/sas.md, before:

---
title: "Secrets of Academic Success"
author: "R (Chandra) Chandrasekhar"
date: "2020-11-29"
save_as: sas.html
---

_Secrets of Academic Success_ is the title of a book that I have been writing since 2007. It is a [soup to nuts](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soup_to_nuts) exposition of how to learn effectively and succeed in your studies. The book espouses [lifelong learning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lifelong_learning) and is suitable for anyone wishing to excel academically, regardless of age, clime, and time.

## Background

I very much wanted to share the fruits of my learning experience in a _single volume_---as a go-to resource for matters academic---so that students everywhere might be helped. _Secrets of Academic Success_ is that book.

Accordingly, the book is _very_ long. It is not meant to be read in one go from cover to cover, but rather consulted as and when the need arises, or absorbed one topic at a time, so that gradual mastery is accomplished.

## Ten parts

The book is divided into ten parts, each of which addresses one aspect of learning. These are briefly described below:

#.  **You**: Your motivation, habits, etc., are vital ingredients for your success. So, we begin at the beginning with _you_.

#.  **Mind**: You use your mind to learn. Listening, seeing, thinking, memory, concentration, relaxation, moods, and related subjects are considered here.

#.  **Resources**: Learning never happens in isolation. How you can learn and benefit from people, libraries, technology, the Web, and such are covered in this part.

#.  **Study Techniques**: Time management, how to benefit from classes and lectures, group study, individual learning, methods of revision, and many other topics are discussed here.

#.  **Reading**: The first of the three Rs's---Reading---is dealt with in detail, including how to read efficiently and with comprehension.

#.  **Writing**: This is perhaps the most important part of the book. Techniques for writing well, including building an extensive vocabulary, and expressing yourself efficiently and fluently, are addressed here.

#.  **Mathematics**: Possibly the most dreaded of the three R's is Arithmetic or its mature cousin, Mathematics. Pertinent issues---from overcoming a dread of the subject, through enjoying popular mathematics books, to avoiding common mistakes when solving problems---are covered here.

#.  **Examinations**: Even if not ideal, the ultimate test of your learning is your performance in examinations. Helpful hints on how to prepare for them, how to answer examination questions, etc., are the subject of this part. Example questions are discussed and answered, with commentaries highlighting techniques to follow and pitfalls to avoid.

#.  **University Studies**: Learning at university requires a higher level of self-discipline than at school. Reading papers, doing research, what to look out for if you decide on a PhD, and how to write academic papers and theses are all covered in this part.

#.  **Working Life**: Some day, you must leave the halls of learning to earn a living. This part helps you make this transition, while exhorting you to make lifelong learning a personal habit.

## Free download with conditions

I am making this book available as a free-of-charge, freely available [soft copy download]({static}../sas-manuscript/SAS-partial.pdf), in the PDF electronic format, so that it may benefit the largest number of sincere students worldwide.

This book is released under the [Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International licence](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), easily recognized by the following logo:

![CC-BY-NC-ND-logo]({static}images/by-nc-nd.svg){ width=50% }

For licence details, [see here](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/legalcode)

## Download

The book is a work-in-progress. Not all parts and chapters are ready yet. The material that _is ready_ is included in the download. But even that material is updated as and when necessary. So, always make sure that you have the most recent version of the draft manuscript available from the link below.

_Secrets of Academic Success_ may be [downloaded from here]({static}../sas-manuscript/SAS-partial.pdf).

Read! Apply! Benefit! Succeed!

Commit message:

Changed licence of book to be copyright plus all rights reserved. Also file linkages to PDF.

content/pages/sas.md, after:

---
title: "Secrets of Academic Success"
author: "R (Chandra) Chandrasekhar"
date: "2020-11-29"
save_as: sas.html
---

_Secrets of Academic Success_ is the title of a book that I have been writing since 2007. It is a [soup to nuts](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soup_to_nuts) exposition of how to learn effectively and succeed in your studies. The book espouses [lifelong learning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lifelong_learning) and is suitable for anyone wishing to excel academically, regardless of age, clime, and time.

## Background

I very much wanted to share the fruits of my learning experience in a _single volume_---as a go-to resource for matters academic---so that students everywhere might be helped. _Secrets of Academic Success_ is that book.

Accordingly, the book is _very_ long. It is not meant to be read in one go from cover to cover, but rather consulted as and when the need arises, or absorbed one topic at a time, so that gradual mastery is accomplished.

## Ten parts

The book is divided into ten parts, each of which addresses one aspect of learning. These are briefly described below:

#.  **You**: Your motivation, habits, etc., are vital ingredients for your success. So, we begin at the beginning with _you_.

#.  **Mind**: You use your mind to learn. Listening, seeing, thinking, memory, concentration, relaxation, moods, and related subjects are considered here.

#.  **Resources**: Learning never happens in isolation. How you can learn and benefit from people, libraries, technology, the Web, and such are covered in this part.

#.  **Study Techniques**: Time management, how to benefit from classes and lectures, group study, individual learning, methods of revision, and many other topics are discussed here.

#.  **Reading**: The first of the three Rs's---Reading---is dealt with in detail, including how to read efficiently and with comprehension.

#.  **Writing**: This is perhaps the most important part of the book. Techniques for writing well, including building an extensive vocabulary, and expressing yourself efficiently and fluently, are addressed here.

#.  **Mathematics**: Possibly the most dreaded of the three R's is Arithmetic or its mature cousin, Mathematics. Pertinent issues---from overcoming a dread of the subject, through enjoying popular mathematics books, to avoiding common mistakes when solving problems---are covered here.

#.  **Examinations**: Even if not ideal, the ultimate test of your learning is your performance in examinations. Helpful hints on how to prepare for them, how to answer examination questions, etc., are the subject of this part. Example questions are discussed and answered, with commentaries highlighting techniques to follow and pitfalls to avoid.

#.  **University Studies**: Learning at university requires a higher level of self-discipline than at school. Reading papers, doing research, what to look out for if you decide on a PhD, and how to write academic papers and theses are all covered in this part.

#.  **Working Life**: Some day, you must leave the halls of learning to earn a living. This part helps you make this transition, while exhorting you to make lifelong learning a personal habit.

## Honour copyright and download

I am making this book freely available as a no-charge, [soft copy download](sas-manuscript/SAS-partial.pdf), in the PDF electronic format, so that it may benefit the largest number of sincere students worldwide.

This book is protected by copyright; please honour it:

```
Copyright © 2007–2021 R (Chandra) Chandrasekhar.

All rights reserved.
```

<!--This book is released under the [Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International licence](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), easily recognized by the following logo:

![CC-BY-NC-ND-logo]({static}images/by-nc-nd.svg){ width=50% }

For licence details, [see here](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/legalcode)-->

## Work-in-progress

The book is a work-in-progress. Not all parts and chapters are ready yet. The material that _is ready_ is included in the download. But even that material is updated as and when necessary. So, always make sure that you have the most recent version of the draft manuscript available from the link below.

_Secrets of Academic Success_ may be [downloaded from here](sas-manuscript/SAS-partial.pdf).

Please [email me](mailto:feedback.sasbook@gmailcom) your corrections and other feedback.

Read! Apply! Benefit! Succeed!
